---
title: "Literature and the Digital Humanities (Book Proposal)"
author: Dennis Tenen

---

# Statement of aims

The purpose of this volume is to introduce academic readers, along with a
broader audience, to the new and growing field of the Digital Humanities (DH),
particularly as that field interesects with the research program in the study
of literature. My approach to writing a volume of this sort aims to achieve two
goals: *first*, descriptive, giving shape and intellectual history to the
variety of scholarly practices that loosely identify as the Digital Humanities,
and *second*, proscriptive, imagining a future for the field more inclusive and
more intelligible to concomitant developments in the life of the modern
university.

As universities across the country and globally invest in programs related to
the digital humanities,[^ln-dh] a need arises for a programmatic vision of a field
that can guide the formation of certificate programs, research labs, and
undergraduate curricula. I plan for the present volume to answer the demand for
such a vision and to go further in creating a paradigmatic "introduction to the
field," which can go on to serve as a foundational text in the study of
literature inflected by the Digital Humanities. Beyond these goals, I join the
editors of the Routledge *Literature and Contemporary Thought* series in the
desire to create a mutually-enriching dialog between literary criticism,
theory, and recent developments in the digital humanities and computational
culture studies.

[^ln-dh]: For example: In February 2015, U. Penn received $7,000,000 from Penn
Arts and Sciences Overseer to establish the Price Lab for the Digital
Humanities. In December 2014, Yale announced an award in the amount of
$3,000,000 from The Goizueta Foundation to inaugurate the Digital Humanities
Laboratory. UC Berkeley announced $2,000,000 from the Andrew W. Mellon
Foundation to advance digital humanities. Stanford has recently launched the
Center for Spatial and Textual Analysis. University of Michigan opened six new
tenure-track searches in a hiring cluster under the rubric of Public Humanities
in a Digital World in 2012. In May of 2014, Bard College was Awarded $800,000
from Andrew W. Mellon Foundation to support Experimental Humanities. The
Claremont Colleges received $1,500,000 from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation to
develop the digital humanities.

# Definition of the market

The primary market for the *Literature and the Digital Humanities* includes:

- advanced undergraduate courses in literary studies wishing to introduce their
  students to the field of digital humanities and computational culture
studies;

- introductory level graduate courses for all doctorate and MA-level students
  entering the field of literary studies, covering DH as part of their "Intro
to the Field," "Pro Seminar," or "MA seminar," as required in most language and
literature programs globally and across the country;

- the large share of self-directed graduate students whose institutions do not
  offer DH training;

- faculty and staff (librarians, officers of scholarly publication) interested
  in expanding their research and activity in the field.

A secondary market for the book includes students and scholars in engineering
schools interested in finding productive intersections between literary studies
and computer science.

Several prominent institutions are beginning to offer degree- or certificate-
granting programs in Digital Humanities. These include MA, PhD, and
undergraduate programs at Kingâ€™s College London; MA and undergraduate programs
at Loyola University, Chicago; the Digital Humanities Minor at UCLA; the DH
undergraduate program at Michigan State University; the DH and Technology
program at Brigham Young; the MA program in Humanities Computing at University
of Alberta, Canada; the PhD, MA, and undergraduate programs at University
College, London and University College, Cork; the MA program in DH at CUNY; the
Digital Cultures and Creativity undergraduate program at University of
Maryland; the MA in DH at Brandeis University; the M.A. in Digital Humanities
at the University of Virginia; Media Technology and Games program at the IT
University of Copenhagen; MA and PhD in Digital Humanities at Maynooth
University, Ireland; the Digital Media and Cultural Theory undergraduate
program at Hampshire College; the Certificate program in DH at University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill; the Arts, Media + Engineering undergraduate
program at Arizona State; the Bachelor of Science in Digital Humanities at the
Illinois Institute of Technology and many others along with undergraduate
minors and non-degree granting research centers that offer courses too numerous
to mention here.

Although I have concentrated my summary of potential markets to universities in
English-speaking countries (primarily Canada, the Republic of Ireland, the
United Kingdom, and the United States), there are significant markets for
English-language work in DH globally. Institutions in Sweden, Germany,
Australia, New Zealand, Israel, and Denmark, among other places are
particularly strong in this field and commonly assign English texts.

# Review of the main competitive books

There is a paucity of texts that occupy the niche targeted by the *Literature
and Comparative Thought* series at the intersection of DH and literary studies.

The first, formative, generation of books about the Digital Humanities included
edited collections, as was the case with the seminal *Companion to Digital
Humanities* (Willey-Blackwell, 2004)[^ln-comp] and *Understanding Digital
Humanities* (Palgrave Macmillan, 2012)[^ln-understand]; compendia of essays and
blog posts, as was the case with *Debates in Digital Humanities* (Minnesota,
2012)[^ln-debates]; co-authored volumes like *Digital_Humanities* (MIT, 2012)
by Jeffrey Schnapp, Johanna Drucker, Anne Burdick, Peter Lunenfeld, and Todd
Presner[^ln-dh2]; and, finally, as institutional set pieces written by
prominent public intellectuals and administrators like the 2013 *Hacking the
Academy: New Approaches to Scholarship and Teaching from Digital Humanities* by
Dan Cohen and Joseph Scheinfeldt (Michigan UP).[^ln-up]

The current, "second generation," wave of DH is beginning to absorb the impact
of the research program and administrative reform proposed by the first into
its constituent fields. I hold that such specification is not only necessary,
but also that it reaches a much wider audience. The application of the Digital
Humanities to specific questions in literary scholarship, as they manifest in
pressing problems of collaborative authorship, digital storytelling, the
quality of online deliberation, and in the politics of the archive and shared
memory formation (to name just a few), begin to gain a measure of specificity
that points to concrete ways of collaboration between diverse practitioners.
Such questions are interesting to computer scientists and game designers alike.

A small number of recent books have began to direct generalist DH approaches
and methodologies to the questions and traditions governing their specific area
of expertise. To these we may attribute *Writing History in the Digital Age
(Michigan UP, 2013),^[ln-hist], *Digital Critical Editions* (U of Illinois,
2014),[^ln-critical] and *Oral History and Digital Humanities: Voice, Access,
and Engagement* (Palgrave, 2014).[^ln-palgrave] Some of the few major volumes
in the nascent second generation pertinent to the study of literature include
*Macroanalysis: Digital Methods and Literary History* by Matthew L. Jockers
(Illinois, 2013),[^ln-macro] which itself builds on the influential *Distant
Reading*, by Franco Moretti (Verso, 2013).[^ln-franco]

In *Literature and the Digital Humanities*, my approach builds on these volumes
to connect the history of the discipline to the Digital Humanities research
program in an evolutionary way. Going beyond computation, I plan to describe DH
as an expansion of the literary-critical tradition, opening up to new archives
of study and to new methodologies. My book ends with a productive critique of
the field itself: noting its successes and outlining strategies to remedy its
failures. I want my reader to leave the book with a sense of possibility:
perceiving rich and yet unexplored areas of scholarship needing our urgent
attention.

[^ln-macro]: 208 pages. $30 paper and ebook, $90 cloth.

[^ln-franco]: 224 pages. $29.95 paper, $24.95 ebook, $95 cloth.

[^ln-hist]: Jack Dougherty and Kristen Nawrotzki. 322 pages. $29.95 ebook and
paper, $80 cloth.

[^ln-critical]: Ed. Daniel Apollon et. al. 368 pages. $65 cloth. $30 ebook.

[^ln-palgrave]: Ed. Douglas A. Boyd and Mary A. Larson. 256 pages. $90 cloth,
$16.50 ebook, $25 paper.

[^ln-comp]: Ed. John M. Unsworth, Susan Schreibman, and Ray Siemens. 640 pages.
$59.95 paper, $235.95 cloth.

[^ln-understand]: Ed. David M. Berry. 336 pages. $30 paper, $16.50 ebook, $110
cloth.

[^ln-debates]: Ed. Matt Gold. 504 pages. $34.95 paper, $20.86 ebook, $99.75 cloth.

[^ln-dh2]: 152 pages. $24.99 trade or ebook.

[^ln-up]: 176 pages. $22.95 paper or ebook, $70 cloth.

[^ln-ramsay]: University of Illinois Press. 108 pages. $25 paper, $65 cloth.


# Chapter Outline

## Chapter 1: Literature and Digital Humanities Now

The first chapter will pose and begin answering the question shaping the rest
of the book: What are the digital humanities? and Why do they matter? In making
a broad summary of the field, I organize the variety of existing practices into
three main categories.  The *first* deals with computational approaches to the
study of literature and culture. Like the computational turn affecting many
other disciplines, advancements in natural language processing techniques and
the wide-spread availability of computational power have made it possible for
scholars to ask qualitatively new questions, at scales of analysis which
include reading at distance (macroanalysis) and textual forensics
(microanalysis, of the kind advocated by Matthew Kirschenbaum in his
*Mechanisms: New Media and the Forensic Imagination*, 2008).

I summarize the second broad category of activity under the rubric of
"knowledge design." In this category we find long-standing scholarly practices
of critical edition making, textual scholarship, and archive formation along
with new concerns related to digitization, tagged corpora, and collaborative
annotation, exemplified by projects like *NINES* (Nineteenth-century Scholarship
Online, U.Virginia), the *Perseus Digital Library* (Ed. Gregory Crane, Tufts
U.), and *HyperCities* (UCLA) among many others.

Finally, I identify the third type of activity as "institutional
transformation." To this category we may ascribe work by Daniel Cohen and
Joseph Scheinfeldt (*Hacking the Academy*, 2015); *4Humanities* site curated by
Alan Liu, Geoffrey Rockwell and Melissa Terras; and the *Media Commons* site
edited by Kathleen Fitzpatrick (also the author of *Planned Obsolescence*,
2011); along with many others too numerous to mention here. These books and
projects have a common concern with the future of the academy, books, reading,
writing, and libraries. Paralleling developments in open access, creative
commons, and free culture, practitioners in this space aim to reform
contemporary institutions of knowledge production and often include critical
interventions that redress imbalances of access and participation along the
lines of gender, race, and geography. This categories capture the diversity of
practices in the field and help structure Part II of the book.

## Chapter 2: Intellectual Roots (Background)

This chapter will offer an introduction to the long-history of the digital
humanities and of quantitative approaches to the study of literature. Of
particular importance in this chapter is to counteract the common "shallow"
vision of the field, which sees its roots in "humanities computing" pioneered
by Father Roberto Busa in the 1940s. Instead the emphasis will be on the
influence of formalism on literary studies, its relationship to structuralism,
and post-structuralist critique.

This chapter will discuss the application of computational methods to literary
studies more narrowly. A case study in authorship attribution will help
illustrate the chapter.

will contain an outline the much broader intellectual an institutional program
of the Digital Humanities. The relationship between making and knowing. Several
case studies will illustrate the strengths and the weaknesses of the approach.

## Chapter 3: Computational Turn

Contextualizing Humanities Computing and the Digital Humanities within the
larger "computational turn" affecting all disciplines of human knowledge
production. The computational turn as (1) a set of new problems posed by
quantification of human experience and the ubiquity of computing devices and
(2) as methodology offering insight at new scales of analysis.

## Chapter 4: Knowledge Design

The changing mechanics of knowledge production and dissemination. Cultural
memory and personal archives. Textual interfaces (ebooks and word processors).
Future of reading. Shared knowledge formation (Wikipedia and Stack Exchange).
The difference between computer science and software engineering and their
relevance to the study of literature.

## Chapter 5: Institutional Transformation

The rapidly changing dynamics of book publishing. The changing nature of
scientific knowledge (reproducibility and access to findings). Transforming
institutions of learning. Digital pedagogy. Transparency in governance. Global issues.

## Chapter 6: Laboratories of Literature

In this chapter, I will describe the challenges of running a laboratory in the
humanities. Making good on the metaphor of the laboratory. Best practices. This
section will describe day-to-day operation of Columbia's Group for Experimental
Method in the Humanities. Three Labs.

##  Chapter 7: Criticism and Ways Forward


### Appendix I: Annotated Reading List

As specified by the editors "the book should also include a list of annotated
further reading suggestions so that it can be used as a springboard for further
research or study."

### Appendix II: Glossary of terms

This section containing a glossary of key operational terms, as requested.

### Appendix III: Becoming Digital

This appendix will contain a schematic for self-directed study in the
humanities and a blueprint for a possible curriculum for a certificate-granting
program in the field.

# Format & Timing

I write concisely and prefer short chapters between 5,000-8,000 words in
length, giving the book the desired length between 60,000 and 80,000 words.
Although no photographic illustrations are necessary, the book will have 6-12
line drawings (figures and tables).

I plan on having a draft of the manuscript ready by January 1, 2016.
