---
title: "Literature and the Digital Humanities (Book Proposal)" 
author: Dennis Tenen
bibliography: plain-text.bib
csl: chicago.csl

---

# Statement of Aims

The purpose of this volume is to introduce academic readers, along with a
broader audience, to the growing field of the Digital Humanities (DH),
particularly as that field intersects with the research program in the study of
literature. My approach to writing a volume of this sort aims to achieve two
goals: *first*, descriptive, giving shape and intellectual history to the
variety of scholarly practices that loosely identify as the digital humanities,
and *second*, aspirational, imagining a future for the field more inclusive and
more intelligible to concomitant developments in the life of the modern
university.

As universities everywhere invest in programs related to the digital
humanities,[^ln-dh] a need arises for a programmatic vision of a field that can
guide the formation of certificate programs, research labs, and undergraduate
curricula. I plan for the present volume to answer the demand for such a vision
and to go further by creating a paradigmatic "introduction to the field," which
can go on to serve as a foundational text in the study of literature inflected
by the digital humanities. Beyond these goals, I join the editors of the
Routledge Literature and Contemporary Thought series in the desire to create a
mutually enriching dialog between literary criticism, theory, and recent
developments in the digital humanities and computational culture studies.

[^ln-dh]: For example: In February 2015, U. Penn received $7,000,000 from Penn
Arts and Sciences Overseer to establish the Price Lab for the Digital
Humanities. In December 2014, Yale announced an award in the amount of
$3,000,000 from The Goizueta Foundation to inaugurate the Digital Humanities
Laboratory. UC Berkeley announced $2,000,000 from the Andrew W. Mellon
Foundation to advance digital humanities. Stanford has recently launched the
Center for Spatial and Textual Analysis. University of Michigan opened six new
tenure-track searches in a hiring cluster under the rubric of Public Humanities
in a Digital World in 2012. In May of 2014, Bard College was Awarded $800,000
from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation to support Experimental Humanities. The
Claremont Colleges received $1,500,000 from the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation to
develop the digital humanities.

# Definition of the Market

The primary market for *Literature and the Digital Humanities* includes:

- advanced undergraduate courses in literary studies wishing to introduce their
  students to the field of digital humanities and computational culture
studies;

- introductory level graduate courses for all doctorate and MA-level students
  entering the field of literary studies, covering DH as part of their "Intro
to the Field," "Pro-seminar," or "MA seminar," as required in most language and
literature programs globally and across the country;

- the large share of self-directed graduate students whose institutions do not
  offer DH training;

- faculty and staff (librarians, officers of scholarly publications) interested
  in expanding their research and activity in the field.

A secondary market for the book includes students and scholars in engineering
schools interested in finding productive intersections between literary studies
and computer science.

Several prominent institutions are beginning to offer degree- or
certificate-granting programs in the digital humanities. These include
undergraduate, MA, and PhD programs at King's College London, University
College, London, and University College, Cork; undergraduate and MA programs at
Loyola University, Chicago; the Digital Humanities Minor at UCLA; the DH
undergraduate program at Michigan State University; the DH and Technology
program at Brigham Young; the MA program in Humanities Computing at University
of Alberta, Canada; the MA program in DH at CUNY; the Digital Cultures and
Creativity undergraduate program at University of Maryland; the MA in DH at
Brandeis University; the MA in Digital Humanities at the University of
Virginia; Media Technology and Games program at the IT University of
Copenhagen; MA and PhD in Digital Humanities at Maynooth University, Ireland;
the Digital Media and Cultural Theory undergraduate program at Hampshire
College, Amherst; the Certificate program in DH at University of North Carolina
at Chapel Hill; the Arts, Media + Engineering undergraduate program at Arizona
State; the Bachelor of Science in Digital Humanities at the Illinois Institute
of Technology, and many others, along with undergraduate minors and
non-degree-granting research centers that offer courses too numerous to mention
here.

Although I have concentrated my summary of potential markets on universities in
English-speaking countries (primarily Canada, the Republic of Ireland, the
United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand, and the United States), there are
significant markets for English-language work in DH globally. Institutions in
Sweden, Germany, Israel, and Denmark, among other places, are particularly
strong in this field and commonly assign English texts.

# Review of the Main Competitive Books

There is a paucity of texts that occupy the niche targeted by the Literature
and Contemporary Thought series at the intersection of DH and literary studies.
The existing books could be classified into two major constellations: one,
geared towards the more general audience of the humanistic disciplines at
large; and another, specific to individual constituent disciplines.

The formative cluster of books about the Digital Humanities more generally
includes:

- *Companion to Digital Humanities*, ed. John M. Unsworth, Susan Schreibman,
  and Ray Siemens (Blackwell, 2004),[^ln-comp] - *Understanding Digital
Humanities*, ed. David M. Berry (Palgrave Macmillan, 2012),[^ln-understand] 

- *Debates in the Digital Humanities*, ed. Matthew K. Gold (Minnesota,
  2012),[^ln-debates]

- *Digital_Humanities* (MIT, 2012) by Jeffrey Schnapp, Johanna Drucker, Anne
  Burdick, Peter Lunenfeld, and Todd Presner, [^ln-dh2]

- *The Emergence of the Digital Humanities* by Steven E. Jones (Routledge,
  2013),[^ln-jones] and

- *Hacking the Academy: New Approaches to Scholarship and Teaching from Digital
  Humanities* ed. Daniel J. Cohen and Joseph Scheinfeldt (Michigan UP,
2013).[^ln-up]

The "second generation" of DH is beginning to absorb the impact of the research
program and administrative reform proposed by the first into its constituent
fields. I hold that such specification is not only necessary, but also that it
reaches a much wider audience. The application of the Digital Humanities to
specific questions in literary scholarship, as they manifest in pressing
problems of collaborative authorship, digital storytelling, the quality of
online deliberation, and in the politics of the archive and shared memory
formation (to name just a few), is beginning to gain a measure of specificity
that points to concrete ways of collaboration between diverse practitioners.
Such questions are interesting to computer scientists and game designers alike.

A small number of recent books have begun to direct generalist DH approaches
and methodologies to the questions and traditions governing their specific area
of expertise. To this category we may attribute:

- *Writing History in the Digital Age* ed. Jack Dougherty and Kristen Nawrotzki
  (Michigan UP, 2013),[^ln-hist]

- *Digital Critical Editions*, ed. Daniel Apollon et al. (U of Illinois,
  2014),[^ln-critical] and

- *Oral History and Digital Humanities: Voice, Access, and Engagement*, ed.
  Douglas A. Boyd and Mary A. Larson (Palgrave Macmillan, 2014).[^ln-palgrave]

Some of the few major volumes in the nascent second generation pertinent to the
study of literature include:

- *Reading Machines: Toward an Algorithmic Criticism* by Stephen Ramsay (U.
  Illinois Press, 2011),[^ln-ramsay]

- *Macroanalysis: Digital Methods and Literary History* by Matthew L. Jockers
  (Illinois, 2013),[^ln-macro] which itself builds on the influential *Distant
Reading* by Franco Moretti (Verso, 2013),[^ln-franco] and

- *Digital Literary Studies: Corpus Approaches to Poetry, Prose, and Drama* by
  David L. Hoover et al. (Routledge, 2014).[^ln-hoover]

In *Literature and the Digital Humanities*, my approach builds on these volumes
to connect the history of the discipline to the digital humanities research
program in an evolutionary way. Going beyond computation, I plan to describe DH
as an expansion of the literary-critical tradition, opening up to new archives
of study and to new methodologies. My book ends with a constructive critique of
the field itself: noting its successes and outlining strategies to remedy its
failures. I want my reader to leave the book with a sense of possibility:
perceiving rich and yet unexplored areas of scholarship needing our urgent
attention.

[^ln-macro]: 208 pages. $90 cloth, $30 paper and e-book.

[^ln-franco]: 224 pages. $95 cloth, $29.95 paper, $24.95 e-book.

[^ln-hist]: 322 pages. $80 cloth, $29.95 paper and e-book.

[^ln-critical]: 368 pages. $65 cloth, $30 e-book.

[^ln-palgrave]: 256 pages. $90 cloth, $25 paper, $16.50 e-book.

[^ln-comp]: 640 pages. $235.95 cloth, $59.95 paper.

[^ln-understand]: 336 pages. $110 cloth, $30 paper, $16.50 e-book.

[^ln-debates]: 504 pages. $99.75 cloth, $34.95 paper, $20.86 e-book.

[^ln-dh2]: 152 pages. $24.99 trade and e-book.

[^ln-up]: 176 pages. $70 cloth, $22.95 paper and e-book.

[^ln-ramsay]: 108 pages. $65 cloth, $25 paper.

[^ln-hoover]: 216 pages. $135 cloth and e-book.

[^ln-jones]: 224 pages. $39.95 cloth and e-book.

# Chapter Outline

## Part I: Interfaces

### Chapter 1: Literature and the Digital Humanities Now

The first chapter will pose and begin answering questions that the rest of the
book: What are the digital humanities? and Why do they matter? In making a
broad summary of the field, I organize the variety of existing practices into
three main categories. The first deals with computational approaches to the
study of literature and culture. Like the computational turn affecting many
other disciplines, advancements in natural language processing techniques and
the widespread availability of computational power have made it possible for
scholars to ask qualitatively new questions, at scales of analysis which
include reading at distance (macroanalysis) and textual forensics
(microanalysis of the kind advocated by Matthew Kirschenbaum in his
*Mechanisms: New Media and the Forensic Imagination*, 2012).

I summarize the second broad category of activity under the rubric of
"knowledge design." In this category we find long-standing scholarly practices
of critical edition-making, textual scholarship, and archive formation, along
with emerging concerns related to digitization, tagged corpora, and
collaborative annotation, exemplified by projects like *NINES*
(Nineteenth-century Scholarship Online, U. Virginia), the *Perseus Digital
Library* (ed. Gregory Crane, Tufts U.), and *HyperCities* (UCLA), among many
others.

Finally, I identify the third type of activity as "institutional
transformation." To this category we may ascribe work by Daniel J. Cohen and
Joseph Scheinfeldt (*Hacking the Academy*, 2013); the *4Humanities* site
curated by Alan Liu, Geoffrey Rockwell, and Melissa Terras et al.; and the
*Media Commons* site edited by Kathleen Fitzpatrick (also the author of
*Planned Obsolescence*, 2011); along with many other projects too numerous to
mention here. These books and projects share a common concern with the future
of the academy, books, reading, writing, and libraries. Paralleling
developments in open access, creative commons, and free culture, practitioners
in this subfield aim to reform contemporary institutions of knowledge
production. This activity often includes critical intervention that aims to
redress imbalances of access and participation along the lines of gender, race,
and geography.

The above three categories capture the diversity of practices in the field and
help to structure Part II of the book.

### Chapter 2: Intellectual Roots[^ln-roots]

This chapter will offer an introduction to the long-history of the digital
humanities and of quantitative approaches to the study of literature. Of
particular importance in this chapter is counteracting the common "shallow"
vision of the field, which sees its roots in "humanities computing" pioneered
by Father Roberto Busa in the 1940s. Instead the emphasis will be on the
influence of formalism on literary studies, its relationship to structuralism,
and post-structuralist critique. The chapter will progress with the development
of the field from "literary and linguistic computing" to the broader variety of
practices in the "digital humanities" as the field exists today.

[^ln-roots]: I took the option of combining the Background and Relevance
chapters (as suggested in the "Routledge Guide to Submitting a Proposal").

## Part II: Theory and Practice

### Chapter 3: Computational Turn

The following three chapters follow the outline presented in the first. Each of
these will contain a case study, illustrating the impact of digital
humanities-inflected work on a specific problem or paradigm in traditional
literary scholarship.

Chapter 3 deals with the first of the three broad rubrics: computational turn,
knowledge design, and institutional transformation. I begin by contextualizing
the turn towards "distant reading" and computation in literary studies within
the larger "computational turn," affecting disciplines across the university.
The various approaches to distant reading include macroanalysis in literary
studies [@ramsay_reading_2011; @jockers_macroanalysis_2013;
@moretti_distant_2013]; culturomics in social science [@aiden_uncharted_2014];
e-discovery in law [@scheindlin_electronic_2004; @scheindlin_scheindlin_2009];
automatic essay evaluation in education [@shermis_handbook_2013]; and medical
informatics in medicine [@shortliffe_biomedical_2013], among others.

I will then summarize the variety of methodologies common to these approaches,
including statistical natural language processing [@manning_foundations_1999;
@jurafsky_speech_2008]; automatic summarization [@radev_centroid-based_2004;
@nenkova_pyramid_2007]; machine learning [@rasmussen_gaussian_2006;
@flach_machine_2012]; network analysis [@opsahl_node_2010;
@szell_measuring_2010; @takhteyev_geography_2012]; and topic modeling
[@wallach_topic_2006; @blei_probabilistic_2012]. In describing the
computational toolkit for literary studies, I want to present not only the
possibilities but also the challenges of using quantitative methods to advance
humanistic inquiry.

The chapter will conclude with a case study, most likely chosen from one of the
pamphlets published by Franco Moretti's lab.

### Chapter 4: Knowledge Design

Chapter 4 will deal with a cluster of practices that I unify under the rubric
of "knowledge design": a sphere of scholarly activity that involves online
critical edition-making, archive formation, digitization, creation of tagged
corpora, collaborative annotation, and textual interface design. As with the
previous chapter, my aim here is to show the continuity of these practices with
traditional concerns in literary studies like textual criticism, print-making,
and book design.

Knowledge design, as I will then argue, is fundamental not only to the *study*
of literature, but also to the material structure of the literary encounter,
which affects all higher modes of reading, writing, and interpretation: close
and distant. For example, the building of libraries and archives shapes the
formation of shared cultural memory, just as e-book design or print-making may
alter the reader's understanding of the text. All forms of contemporary
textuality (including print) pass through some form of digital being: from word
processors to typesetting tools, online book stores, search engines, and e-book
readers. It is vital therefore that literary scholars do not leave these
fundamentally literary, textual concerns to technologists who lack deep
humanistic training, sensitive to history and cultural context.

The chapter will end with a case study from a prominent online archive that has
changed the reception of its materials in a significant way: something along
the lines of the *Perseus Digital Library*, Andrew Stauffer's *Book Traces*
project, or Jerome McGann's *Rossetti Archive*.

### Chapter 5: Institutional Transformation

This chapter will feature the work of scholars like Daniel Cohen, Joseph
Scheinfeldt, Alan Liu, Geoffrey Rockwell, Melissa Terras, Kathleen Fitzpatrick,
Tara McPherson, and Jessica Marie Johnson---scholars whose work often carries
with it a social and political dimension, aimed at transforming institutions of
knowledge production, reception, and dissemination. After highlighting several
prominent projects in that vein, I will ground this aspect of digital
humanities in the dual movement between critical theory and critical making. I
will further connect developments in this regard with broader social changes as
exemplified by communities advocating for open access, creative commons, and
free culture.

## Part III: Field Reflections

### Chapter 6: Literature Laboratories

The goal of this chapter is to introduce the reader to everyday "laboratory
life" as reflected by the activity of research groups whose work happens at the
intersection of literary studies and the digital humanities. To write this
chapter, I plan to interview (by email or in person) founders and primary
investigators from several distinct "literary labs." To these ends I have begun
making contacts at Stanford, University of Virginia, UCLA, Arizona State, MSU,
University of Nebraska, McGill, and Chicago among other institutions. From each
of these places I am soliciting responses to the following questions (to be
further refined in consultation with an anthropologist):

- What does it mean for you to run a "laboratory" in the humanities?
- Describe your space.
- How often do you meet?
- What is your governance structure?
- What roles do you assign to your participants?
- How do you handle issues of labor and attribution?
- How do you distribute your findings?
- What is your research program? How do you describe your work?
- What methodologies do you use?
- How does your work connect to literary and cultural studies?
- How do you address training?
- What other fields / departments are involved?

Given her interest in DH field work, it is likely that Tanya Clement (Assistant
Professor in the School of Information at the University of Texas, Austin) will
join this chapter as a coauthor. The chapter will conclude with a synthesis of
the findings, in an attempt to articulate best practices in the field.

### Chapter 7: Criticism and Ways Forward

This final chapter will contain an overview of and an extended response to the
several major avenues of critique commonly leveled against the digital
humanities. These include:

1. Literature is not data. DH methodologies amount to reductive positivism,
   scientism, and computationalism [@fish_what_1979; @golumbia_cultural_2009;
@fish_digital_2012; @marche_literature_2012; @kirsch_technology_2014].

2. Mirroring the tech industry, the digital humanities privilege white,
   Anglo-centric, male, or commercialized modes of a- or anti-theoretical
discourse [@golumbia_cultural_2009; @fiormonte_towards_2012; @liu_where_2012;
@mcpherson_why_2012].

The chapter and the book will end with a productive discussion about what can
be done to mitigate some of these concerns. In conclusion, I will argue that in
order to be effective, the field needs to better connect emerging practices of
critical making and computational methodology to a robust sense of literary
thought and history. Critical practice, as I will explain, involves reclaiming
the material bases of knowledge production. More than a set of methodologies,
the digital humanities ultimately enlarge the sphere of literary-critical
activity. But the expansion of the field comes also with new responsibilities:
the need for more training, resources, and digital literacy.

## Appendices

#### Appendix I: Annotated Reading List

will contain an annotated list of seminal books, articles, and projects that
can be used as a "springboard for further research or study" (as per the Series
Guidelines).

#### Appendix II: Glossary of Terms

will contain a glossary of key operational terms.

#### Appendix III: Becoming Digital

will contain a schematic for self-directed study in the humanities and a
blueprint for a possible curriculum for a certificate-granting program in the
field.

# Format and Timing

I estimate chapters of 10,000 words in length, which in combination with the
appendices will put the manuscript at roughly 80,000 words. The book will have
6--12 line drawings (figures and tables). I plan on having a draft of the
manuscript ready by January 1, 2016.
